Changes since CPAchecker 1.6.1
------------------------------
* CPAchecker requires Java 8.


Changes from CPAchecker 1.6 to CPAchecker 1.6.1
-----------------------------------------------
* Important bug fix for all configurations that use a sequential combination
  of analyses, for the example the -sv-comp16 configuration
  (internal time limits were not handled correctly).


Changes from CPAchecker 1.4 to CPAchecker 1.6
---------------------------------------------
* Local Policy Iteration
  A new analysis has been added to CPAchecker
  that derives numerical invariants from linear templates
  with policy iteration in an efficient manner.

* Formula Slicing Analysis
  A new analysis was developed for CPAchecker that derives inductive invariants
  from loop-free traces from the analyzed program.

* Refinement Selection
  The value analysis and the predicate analysis can now use
  refinement selection for choosing well-suited ways to refine
  the analysis for an infeasible counterexample.

* Symbolic Execution
  CPAchecker now supports symbolic execution
  by enhancing the value analysis to not only track explicit,
  but also symbolic values.

* Improved Heap Support for Predicate Analysis
  The predicate analysis now supports a heap analysis
  with unbounded memory regions by using the SMT theory of arrays.
  This can be enabled with cpa.predicate.handleHeapArray=true.

* Concurrency Support
  CPAchecker now supports the analysis of concurrent programs
  with a limited number of threads
  by using value analysis or BDD-based analysis.

* Witness Export and Validation
  After an analysis, CPAchecker exports witnesses
  that contain information about found counterexamples or correctness-proofs.
  The format of the witnesses is standardized and 
  a description is available at
  https://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2016/witnesses

* Support for Verification Tasks with Multiple Source Files
  Multiple C source files can be given as input to CPAchecker,
  and they will be linked together and analyzed as a single program.

* BenchExec
  The benchmarking script (scripts/benchmark.py) of CPAchecker
  evolved into the independent project BenchExec
  (https://github.com/sosy-lab/benchexec).
  It provides reliable benchmarking and resource measurement
  for arbitrary tools.

* JavaSMT
  The SMT interface layer of CPAchecker got refactored into its own library
  JavaSMT (https://github.com/sosy-lab/java-smt)
  and can now be used by other projects as well.
  Because of this, a lot of configuration options related to solver usage
  were renamed from "cpa.predicate.*" to "solver.*",
  so please check your configuration if necessary.

* 32bit binaries of native libraries and tools removed
  If you need to run CPAchecker on a 32bit system with a configuration
  that relies on native libraries, you need to compile them yourself
  and put them in the directory "lib/native/x86-linux/"
  (cf. documentation of JavaSMT).


Changes from CPAchecker 1.3.4 to CPAchecker 1.4
-----------------------------------------------
* Sliced Interpolation for Value Analysis
  The refinement for value analysis now uses an improved interpolation procedure
  that allows to choose better interpolants
  and thus increases the performance of the analysis.

* Continuously-Refined Invariants for k-Induction
  The k-induction-based analysis can now be supplied
  with a sequence of increasingly precise invariants throughout the analysis,
  leading to a more efficient and effective combination
  of k-induction and invariant generation.

* Counterexample Checks
  CPAchecker provides the ability to double-check a counterexample
  found by one analysis with a different analysis,
  in order to decrease the number of false alarms with only little overhead.
  The second analysis can usually be more precise,
  because it is only used for loop-free paths of the original program.
  This is now enabled by default for the predicate analysis
  (the counterexample check is done by the value analysis)
  and the value analysis (the counterexample check is done by
  a bitprecise configuration of the predicate analysis).
  This combines the respective advantages of both analyses.

* Floating-Point Arithmetic with Predicate Analysis
  The predicate analysis has got support for precise modeling
  of floating-point arithmetic (in config -predicateAnalyis-bitprecise),
  thanks to the addition of support for this in the SMT solver MathSAT5.

* The default configuration of the predicate analysis is now more precise:
  it uses integers to approximate int variables instead of rationals.
  Overflows and bit operators like shifts are still not handled,
  the (slower) configuration -predicateAnalysis-bitprecise
  can be used for this.

* The default SMT solver is now SMTInterpol,
  which is written in Java and available on all platforms.
  MathSAT5 continues to be used for configurations
  that SMTInterpol does not support.

* The SMT solver Princess (http://www.philipp.ruemmer.org/princess.shtml)
  has been integrated into CPAchecker's predicate analysis
  and can be selected with cpa.predicate.solver=princess.

* The configuration files for value analysis have been renamed.
  Instead of -explicitAnalysis or similar,
  you now need to use -valueAnalysis.


Changes from CPAchecker 1.2 to CPAchecker 1.3.4
-----------------------------------------------

Main changes:

* Conditional Model Checking (CMC)
  The flexibility of sequential combinations of analyses inside CPAchecker has been extended.
  A configuration based on this won two categories of SV-COMP'14
  and a silver medal in the category Overall
  (cf. http://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2014/results/).

* Symbolic Memory Graphs (SMG)
  An analysis that models the heap precisely as SMGs has been added
  and can be used for finding memory violations.
  It won the category MemorySafety of SV-COMP'14
  (cf. http://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2014/results/).

* Precision Reuse
  The explicit-value analysis and the predicate analysis have gained support for precision reuse,
  a technique that allows much faster regression verification,
  i.e., verification of a new version of a program
  (cf. "Precision Reuse for Efficient Regression Verification".
  Dirk Beyer, Stefan Löwe, Evgeny Novikov, Andreas Stahlbauer, and Philipp Wendler.
  In Proc. ESEC/FSE, ACM, 2013).

* Domain Types
  A suitable abstract domain can be selected automatically
  depending on the usage pattern of each variable,
  for example a BDD or explicit-value analysis
  (cf. "Domain Types: Abstract-Domain Selection Based on Variable Usage".
  Sven Apel, Dirk Beyer, Karlheinz Friedberger, Franco Raimondi, and Alexander von Rhein.
  In Proc. HVC, LNCS 8244, Springer, 2013).

* k-Induction
  A proof method based on k-Induction (using an SMT solver) has been added
  and can be combined with our bounded-model-checking implementation
  (config -bmc-induction).

* Predicate Analysis
  A much improved pointer handling is implemented and enabled by default.
  Furthermore, support for a bitprecise handling of all int variables has been added
  (including overflows and bitwise operators).
  This configuration is available as -predicateAnalysis-bitprecise.

* Google App Engine
  CPAchecker has been successfully ported to the Google App Engine,
  accessible via a web frontend (http://cpachecker.appspot.com) and a JSON API.

* Improved C Frontend
  Support for many additional C features has been added to CPAchecker.
  Pre-processing with CIL is not necessary any more.
  CPAchecker can be given several C files at once
  and links them together before verifying them as a single program.
  This simplifies verification of programs consisting of multiple source files.

* Experimental Java Support
  A Java frontend has been added to CPAchecker,
  and some analyses were extended to support verification of Java programs.
  This is still experimental and several language features are still missing
  (e.g., exceptions).


Further changes:

* Java 7 is required now.

* Specification
  Support for property files of the SV-COMP added, specify them with -spec <FILE.prp>
  (cf. http://sv-comp.sosy-lab.org/2014/rules.php)

* Configuration-File Changes:
  File names are now relative to the file in which they are given,
  several CPAs have been renamed (ABMCPA -> BAMCPA, ExplicitCPA -> ValueAnalysisCPA),
  many changes to other configuration options as well.
  If you use your own configuration files, you will need to adjust them
  (cf. doc/ConfigurationOptions.txt)

* Error Paths
  Multiple error paths can be searched and written to disk
  with the option "analysis.stopAfterError = false".
  More information about variable assignments has been added to the error paths.
  The use of the report generator has been simplified,
  just call scripts/report-generator.py (cf. doc/BuildReport.txt).

* SMT solvers for Predicate Analysis:
  SMTInterpol (http://ultimate.informatik.uni-freiburg.de/smtinterpol/index.html)
  is now well integrated.
  The support for MathSAT4 was dropped (MathSAT5 continues to be the default solver).

* Benchmarking Support
  CPAchecker provides scripts for benchmarking with large sets of programs.
  These have been extended and now provide more precise time and memory measurement
  (using Linux cgroups). Also the generated HTML tables have more features now.
  (cf. doc/Benchmark.txt)


Changes from CPAchecker 1.1 to CPAchecker 1.2
---------------------------------------------

CPAchecker now supports several new analyses:

* CEGAR for ExplicitCPA (as submitted to SV-COMP'13)
  (c.f. "Explicit-State Software Model Checking Based on CEGAR and Interpolation", to appear in FASE'13)
  This can be enabled with the "explicitAnalysis" and "explicitAnalysis-ItpRefiner*" configurations
  (explicitAnalysis-ItpRefiner-ABElf is recommended)

* Conditional Model Checking (CMC)
  (c.f. "Conditional Model Checking: A Technique to Pass Information between Verifiers", FSE'12)
  To use two or more CMC-enabled configurations, use the "-cmc" command-line argument:
  Example: -cmc explicitAnalysis-100s-generate-cmc-condition -cmc predicateAnalysis-use-cmc-condition

* Sequential composition of analyses (as submitted to SV-COMP'13)
  The "-cmc" command-line argument can be used for this, too.
  Example: -cmc explicitAnalysis-100s -cmc predicateAnalysis

* Predicate-based analysis using the Impact refinement strategy
  (c.f. "Algorithms for Software Model Checking: Predicate Abstraction vs. IMPACT", FMCAD'12)
  This can be enabled with the "predicateAnalysis-ImpactRefiner-*" configurations.

* BDD-based analysis tracking a subset of variables,
  with ExplicitCPA tracking the remaining variables.
  This can be enabled with the "explicit-BDD-*" configurations.

Other changes to CPAchecker:
* Pre-processing of C files with CIL is no longer needed.
* MathSAT5 is now used as as SMT solver by default.
  MathSAT4 can still be selected by setting the option
  cpa.predicate.solver=Mathsat4
* In configuration files, #include directives can be used
  to include other configuration files.
* The file format of the file with the initial set of predicates
  (option cpa.predicate.abstraction.initialPredicates) and
  the final set of predicates (option cpa.predicate.predmap.file) was changed.
  It is now the same format for both files, and based on the SMTlib2 format.
  See doc/examples/predmap.txt for an example.
* The option cpa.predicate.machineModel was renamed to analysis.machineModel.
* The Cudd BDD library was removed, now JavaBDD's implementation is used by default
  (it has similar performance, but more features).
* The ARTCPA was renamed to ARGCPA.
  Replace cpa.art with cpa.arg and ARTCPA with ARGCPA in existing configuration files.
* The option analysis.traversal.useTopsort (used in most configuration files)
  was renamed to analysis.traversal.useReversePostorder as this name is more precise.
* SMTInterpol, an SMT solver written in Java, is now integrated into CPAchecker.
  With this solver, predicate analysis works on all platforms.
  Some configuration options were renamed in order to not be MathSAT-specific.
* The log level for the console can now be adjusted during runtime.
  Use a JMX client to do that, e.g., jconsole or VisualVM.
  Connect to the CPAchecker process,
  locate the MXBean "org.sosy_lab.common:type=LogManager",
  and set the attribute.
* The option "cpa.removeIrrelevantForErrorLocations" was renamed to
  "cfa.removeIrrelevantForSpecification", as this name is more appropriate.
* A time limit of 15 minutes is now enabled by default in most configurations.
  If the analysis is not yet finished, CPAchecker will stop after this time and report UNKNOWN.
  The time limit can be controlled with the "cpa.conditions.global.time.wall" option
  and the "-timelimit" command-line argument.
  Example:
  scripts/cpa.sh -predicateAnalysis -timelimit 1min test.c
* If the #include directive of specification automata is used with relative paths,
  the base directory of the relative path is now the directory of the file which contains the #include,
  not the CPAchecker root directory.
  If #include is used with relative paths in a specification file, it most probably needs adjustment.
